---
layout: post
title:  CCC prep
date:   2021-06-19
updated: 2022-03-25 
tags: [competitive programming]
usemathjax: true
---

The CCC has a special place in my heart as it was basically the only thing I did during quarantine (which in hindsight was probably why I dodged most of the existential crises and mental health issues other people were experiencing, as I still had something to work towards). I'll always remember being woken up by a barrage of notifications from people DMing me that I qualified for stage 2 <3

# about the contest

The [CCC](https://cemc.uwaterloo.ca/contests/computing.html) is the most prominent competitive programming contest for Canadian high schoolers, held by the University of Waterloo. Competitors are given 3 hours to solve 5 coding problems. In these problems, input and output are specified, and the object is to write a program that takes in input, does some computation, and produces the answer.  These problems rely on concepts like designing efficient algorithms and ad-hoc thinking. An example of a problem could be to find the [modular inverse of a number](https://dmoj.ca/problem/ccc01j2). 
Your code is submitted to an online judge which automatically grades the code against premade test cases. Code is graded on correctness and time/memory usage. Each problem is worth 15 points for a total of 75 points. If you cannot earn full marks on a problem, there are also often partial points available. These subtasks are simpler cases of the problem, for example one that allows less efficient solutions to pass. During the CCC, students are only allowed to use the internet for coding or consulting official documentation. More notably, resources such as Google or other code forums like StackOverflow are forbidden. In addition, access to prewritten code is not allowed.

Through good performance you can earn a spot on the Honour roll (top 3-ish%) which is sorted by Group 1, 2, 3, etc from highest to lowest score. You could also be invited to the Canadian Computing Olympiad which is a week-long camp with two contest days (usually top 25ish).

A lot of people are motivated to do this contest due to the fact that performance on the CCC is taken into consideration for admissions to certain Waterloo programs including math, computer science, and software engineering.

If you plan on working in the tech industry, prepping for the CCC will also help you pass codding interviews later on, as the problems given are [pretty similar.](https://leetcode.com/discuss/interview-question/352460/Google-Online-Assessment-Questions)


# programming language

The CCC Online grader currently supports [C, C++, Python(2 and 3), Pascal, Java, Perl, and PHP](https://cemc.uwaterloo.ca/contests/computing/details.html#languages), though most people use C++, Python, or Java. 

While majority of the top competitors use C++, I'd say it's fine to use whatever you're comfortable with. The reasons for using C++ are that it runs faster and comes with useful features e.g. `std::set`, `#define`s, and more. However, it is important to note that due to their slower runtimes the CCC does not guarantee that a perfect score is possible with non C++ languages. 

Regardless, programming language is not as important as a good understanding of computer science concepts, and you can always switch languages later if you feel like it.

# resources I think are reasonably okay

I personally spent the vast majority of my time on Codeforces, but don't spend too much time trying to figure out "optimal" training. All practice is good practice and any of the four websites I've listed are fine. Just pick something and start :)


#### [Atcoder](https://atcoder.jp/)

Atcoder has really good thinking problems with extremely well written statements. I find that these problems tend to be more mathy. Atcoder runs weekly rated contests, but it can be hard to wake up for them as they are in the morning on weekends (EST timezone). If you choose to use Atcoder, [kenkoooo](https://kenkoooo.com/atcoder/#/table/) is a useful resource to help you pick problems of the appropriate difficulty.

#### [Codeforces](https://codeforces.com/)

Good thinking problems that have tags and are sorted according to their difficulty, which can help you pick the right problems. Finally, Codeforces also has frequent rated contests which can keep you motivated to practice! Also has the largest global community. Unfortunately, due to timezones their contests often collide with school hours ~~but that doesn't have to stop you~~.

#### [DMOJ](https://dmoj.ca/)
Good for meeting like-minded Canadian high schoolers (most DMOJ users are Canadian) and has an active [Discord](https://discordapp.com/invite/EgJVpxz). Getting involved in the community is actually really beneficial as you can seek guidance from more experienced people, and everything is more fun with friends <3. This website also hosts past CCC/CCO problems.

#### [CSES Problemset](https://cses.fi/)

Collection of classical problems which frequently appear as subproblems. No official editorials, but there is an accompanying book (Competitive Programmer's Handbook) and you can probably find solutions on GitHub/Codeforces blogs.

#### Other resources
- [cp-algorithms](https://cp-algorithms.com/)
- [USACO Guide](https://usaco.guide/)
- [GeeksforGeeks](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/)

If you do not know how to code at all, you can try [Darren Yao's book](https://darrenyao.com/usacobook/cpp.pdf), some basic [Hackerrank](https://www.hackerrank.com/domains/cpp?filters%5Bdifficulty%5D%5B%5D=easy) challenges, or a high school computer science course!

# tips for effective practice*

*though there is no shortcut to just doing a lot of problems :p 

#### picking problems at random

Picking problems at random forces you to think about every problem with no info, whereas other approaches like picking by topic might spoil some parts of the solution. Also, you practice an even spread of topics like graphs, dynamic programming, data structures, etc. I went to Codeforces's problemset and started from problems rated 1600, and slowly worked my way up.

If you get stuck, you can read editorials or ask someone for help. One thing I wish I didn't do was reading solutions too fast - try to not read solutions unless you are really stuck and have no leads. 

#### thinking > knowledge

One pitfall I've seen people fall into is learning techniques that are too far above their level. There are many cool competitive programming techniques i.e. advanced data structures. However, learning such topics without being able to solve easier problems is pointless, as you'll never be able to apply those things in contest. 

If we look at the 2 recent years of the CCC, we can notice that the complexity of techniques or "knowledge" needed to qualify for the CCO is actually quite small. Rather, what makes or breaks your performance is being able to apply basic concepts in creative ways.


<style>
table th:first-of-type {
    width: 10%;
}
table th:nth-of-type(2) {
    width: 10%;
}
table th:nth-of-type(3) {
    width: 50%;
}
</style>


##### Sample 2021 CCO-qualifying score distribution (67)

| Problem | Score | Required Knowledge                                                        |
|---------|-------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| S1      | 15    | area of a triangle, outputting decimal numbers                            |
| S2      | 15    | for loops                                                                 |
| S3      | 15    | binary search or line sweep                                               |
| S4      | 15    | breadth first search, STL containers like `set` (C++) or `TreeSet` (Java) |
| S5      | 7     | greatest common divisor / lowest common multiple                          |

##### Sample 2020 CCO-qualifying score distribution (60)

| Problem | Score | Required Knowledge                                                        |
|---------|-------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| S1      | 15    | sorting, outputting decimal numbers                                       |
| S2      | 15    | breadth-first search                                                      |
| S3      | 15    | hashing                                                                   |
| S4      | 15    | prefix sum arrays                                                         |
| S5      | 0     | none                                                                      |


If we lower our goal to qualifying for the honour roll, this bar goes even lower!

#### rated contests

Rated contests are available on many platforms like the ones I mentioned. The main benefits of rated contests are:
- Having something on the line, even if it's just fake internet points
- Being able to manage contest pressure with a timer
- Being exposed to holes in your knowledge
- Knowing what your true skill level is

One good habit after doing a contest is to do the easiest problem(s) you got stuck on, reading solutions if you need to. Some good contests that I haven't already mentioned include [USACO](http://www.usaco.org/), Google [Kickstart](https://codingcompetitions.withgoogle.com/kickstart)/[Code Jam](https://codingcompetitions.withgoogle.com/codejam), [Facebook Hacker Cup](https://www.facebook.com/codingcompetitions/hacker-cup), [COCI](https://hsin.hr/coci/), and [ECOO](https://ecoocs.org/).

# "how good do I need to be to make xyz? / what should I know? / how much did you practice?"

This is a difficult question to answer, mostly because it's scary to make bold claims like "if you know this, this and this you _will_ qualify for xyz". Also, it's really hard to quantitatively measure competitive programming skill. At the time of writing CCC 2021 (late February) my Codeforces rating fluctuated between 1600-1800, though there were people with lower rating that did better than me and those with higher rating that did worse. I began seriously training in around March 2020, when Ontario schools closed due to the pandemic. Prior to that, I had done a bit of competitive programming casually and placed in the CCC honour roll in 2020. I had no contest math experience prior to starting contest programming.

Unofficial spreadsheets of some people who chose to disclose their score:

- [2021](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1VeuPP-fo9azezUR1NNmwgPCtacHuthzYyDyswDj24nc/edit#gid=1035208835)
- [2020](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1M7qWouF9KbLDrIsQNZ3nV5FDmE1Op-qFsvSlgl5VSvk/edit?usp=sharing)

# miscellaneous

#### there are other things in the world

If you didn't perform on the day of it can feel like all the time you spent preparing was useless, but even without a good performance you gain so much from even trying. There are many people who get into Waterloo with a bad CCC score, and likewise there are top scorers that get rejected/deferred (and even then, Waterloo admissions is not the end of the world). I strongly believe that the main benefits of spending time prepping for contests have nothing to do with winning, for example:
- Meeting highly motivated friends
    - Super underrated! ["In many ways being part of the high school math contest community is a lot like having access to the peer group at a top-tier university, except four years earlier."](https://blog.evanchen.cc/2018/01/05/lessons-from-math-olympiads/)
- Experiencing failure for the first time
    - For many people contests are the first time they fail at something they genuinely tried at and care about a lot, and I think this builds character!
- Not falling victim to the [Dunning Kruger effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect)
    - A lot of people think they're hot shit because they kind of know how to code and are slightly above average, contests are really good at humbling them
- Realizing that if you set your mind to something, you could go a lot further than you think
    - This is a common theme found in stuff like inspirational grindset posts on Instagram, but actually living it that lets you believe it with conviction


I struggle a lot with not having a toxic obsession with results - I spent a lot of time being angry at contests rather than just enjoying the process and being grateful for all of the above benefits I was able to have (which ended up being counterproductive and hindering my improvement anyway). Something that helped me gain a healthier outlook on contests was remembering that in the long run contest results don't really matter all that much, and there's a ton of people that are successful without contests.  

Also, even though everyone's situation is different, you should consider that it might not be worthwhile to sacrifice things like grades(!!!), extracurriculars or relationships for competitive programming.

#### lessons

Something to consider is taking additional lessons at third-party schools e.g. [Olympiads School](https://olympiads.ca/). These programs basically consist of weekly homework/problem takeup, with occasional contests sprinkled in. My personal opinion is that these are essentially (pretty pricy) editorial services, and you can forgo them but they don't hurt. I went to Olympiads for a semester around 1-2 months before CCC 2021, but I think I still would have qualified for the CCO without Olympiads. Some aspects that might be helpful are motivation, making friends, and being guided by someone who knows how contests work. A lot of CCO qualifiers go to Olympiads School, though correlation != causation.

#### contest strategy
Having good contest strategy is also important to doing well! Some examples include:
- Reading all the problems and getting partial points wherever you can
- Not tunnel visioning on a certain approach. For example, if you make a strong assumption that a problem requires data structures at the beginning, you might overlook other solutions.
- Making "baby steps" e.g. working through sample, guessing properties, solving subproblems
- Using the entire allotted time instead of giving up near the end because you think you can't get any more points anyway
- Knowing when to give up on a problem and when to keep trying

#### should I do the junior division instead?

There are two divisions of the CCC, junior and senior. The difference is pretty self-explanatory - the junior division is much easier than the senior, with problems requiring less knowledge and less thinking. The junior division is aimed at "any student with elementary programming skills", whereas the senior division is aimed at "any student with intermediate to advanced programming skills".

While the junior division can seem attractive as there are easy problems to make you feel better, it's probably in your best interest to write the senior division. From the perspective of university applications, the junior division is most likely insignificant - when asking about computing contests the Waterloo AIF explicitly asks about participation in the senior division, not the junior. In addition, writing the senior division brings a non-zero chance of recognition through the senior honour roll or a CCO qualification, so why not? Even if you are inexperienced, there will always be some partial marks for you to attempt.

A basic understanding of how to code e.g. input/output, variables, loops (covered in a typical grade 11 computer science course) is easily enough to get a non-zero score on the senior division.

**tl;dr writing the junior division is objectively wrong, as the junior division is guaranteed zero benefit and the senior division is potentially non-zero benefit.**

#### other tips
- Don't compare your rate of performance to others - just because you aren't improving as fast doesn't mean you're dumb. Perhaps they had prior experience like math contests, or maybe you just need to keep going and be patient!
- Don't play League of Legends that shit is actually crack
- `#define int long long` so you never have to worry about overflow :3
- If you're on a Mac figure out how to install GCC
- Sleep is very important! Some ways to sleep better is to exercise right before sleeping or taking melatonin pills
- If writing in person don't bring a loud keyboard or people will get mad at you
- Bring scrap paper and pencils
- Eat well beforehand

#### good things to read/watch by people way more qualified than me
- [Self-deception: maybe why you're still grey after practicing every day](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/98621) - Um_nik
- [Math contest platitudes, v3](https://usamo.wordpress.com/2019/01/31/math-contest-platitudes-v3/) - Evan Chen
- [Talk @ Math Prize For Girls 2015](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cVlR-5hS6f4) - Zuming Feng
- [AIME mindset](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oXqhZBhGAcs) - TheBeautyofMath
- [Starting Competitive Programming - Steps and Mistakes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bVKHRtafgPc) - William Lin (tmwilliamlin168)
- [A way to Practice Competitive Programming : From Rating 1000 to 2400+](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/66909) - Masataka Yoneda (E869120)
- [The 'science' of training in competitive programming](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/17842) - Trung Nguyen (I_love_Hoang_Yen)
- [Competitive Programmer's Handbook](https://cses.fi/book/book.pdf) - Antti Laaksonen (pllk)
- [An Introduction To the USA Computing Olympaid](https://darrenyao.com/usacobook/cpp.pdf) - Darren Yao
- [F.A.Q. (in PM)](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/47516) - Alex Danilyuk (Um_nik)
